---
title: Getting Started
description: Taking your first steps with the Create mod
---

# Getting Started

Thank you for choosing Create! Here's some guidance for your first steps in the Create mod.

## Core concepts

Create revolves around two main concepts: [Rotational Power]() and [Contraptions]().

**Rotational Power** is Create's energy system, used to power [Machines]() and Contraptions, and is generated by [Hand Cranks](), [Water Wheels](), [Windmill Bearings]() and [Steam Engines](). RP is transmitted by using [Shafts](), [Cogwheels](), [Belts](), and more recently, [Chain Conveyors]()!

**Contraptions** are game entities built by the player that are able to shape the world around them. These entities are made from regular blocks and [Actors](), and may be grouped by which kind of anchor they use. Some examples of anchors include [Mechanical Bearings](), [Elevator Pulleys]() and [Trains]().

This is just a summary, and you can learn more about each topic in their respective pages.

## First steps

When starting out, focus on collecting a good ammount of **Andesite**, **Iron**, **Kelp** and any type of **wood** (both logs and planks). With Andesite and Iron (or Zinc) Nuggets, you can craft [Andesite Alloy](), and after stripping some logs, you can use the Alloy on the stripped wood to create an [Andesite Casing](), a basic building block for many Create components.

With two pieces of Andesite Alloy you can craft **Shafts**. With Shafts and planks you can craft **Cogwheels** (large and small) and **Water Wheels** (large and small). By making Dried Kelp in a Furnace or Smoker, you can craft **Belts**. You are now able to generate and transmit Rotational Power!

With your newfound powers and components, you can start creating your first **Machines**, such as a [Mechanical Press](), a [Mechanical Mixer]() and a [Mechanical Fan](). These specific machines are interesting for starting out because they allow for, respectively, [Pressing Recipes]() (for making plates), [Mixing Recipes]() (for making plates), and perhaps most importantly, [Bulk Processing]() (such as smelting, smoking and washing).

By following these steps, you should have a solid foundation to build upon. To continue progressing, combine what you have learned here with the ingame [Ponder]() system, and start working towards [Brass]().

By this point you should also consider looking into Create's logistical features for moving items around and automating a few basic resources, as well as creating your first **Contraptions** &mdash; Tree farms and tunnel bores are fan favorites!