---
title: Getting Started
description: Taking your first steps with the Create mod
---

# Getting Started

Thank you for choosing Create! Here's some guidance for your first steps in the Create mod.

## Core concepts

Create revolves around two main concepts: [Rotational Power](./concepts/rotational-power/) and [Contraptions](./contraptions/).

**Rotational Power** is Create's energy system, used to power [Machines](./kinetics/machines/) and Contraptions, and is generated by [Hand Cranks](./kinetics/crank/), [Water Wheels](./kinetics/water-wheel/), [Windmill Bearings](./contraptions/mechanical-bearing/) and [Steam Engines](./kinetics/steam-engine/). RP is transmitted by using [Shafts](./kinetics/shaft/), [Cogwheels](./kinetics/cogwheel/), [Belts](./kinetics/belt/), and more recently, [Chain Conveyors](./kinetics/chain-conveyor/)!

**Contraptions** are game entities built by the player that are able to shape the world around them. These entities are made from regular blocks and [Actors](./contraptions/actors/), and may be grouped by which kind of anchor they use. Some examples of anchors include [Mechanical Bearings](./contraptions/mechanical-bearing/), [Elevator Pulleys](./contraptions/elevator-pulley/) and [Trains](./trains/).

This is just a summary, and you can learn more about each topic in their respective pages.

## First steps

When starting out, focus on collecting a good ammount of **Andesite**, **Iron**, **Kelp** and any type of **wood** (both logs and planks). With Andesite and Iron (or Zinc) Nuggets, you can craft [Andesite Alloy](./materials/andesite-alloy/), and after stripping some logs, you can use the Alloy on the stripped wood to create an [Andesite Casing](./decoration/casing/), a basic building block for many Create components.

With two pieces of Andesite Alloy you can craft **Shafts**. With Shafts and planks you can craft **Cogwheels** (large and small) and **Water Wheels** (large and small). By making Dried Kelp in a Furnace or Smoker, you can craft **Belts**. You are now able to generate and transmit Rotational Power!

With your newfound powers and components you can start creating your first **Machines**, such as a [Mechanical Press](./machines/mechanical-press), a [Mechanical Mixer](./machines/mechanical-mixer) and an [Encased Fan](./machines/encased-fan). These specific machines are interesting for starting out because they allow for, respectively, [Pressing Recipes](./concepts/recipes#pressing) (Plates), [Mixing Recipes](./concepts/recipes#mixing) (better yield on Andesite Alloy), and perhaps most importantly, [Bulk Processing](./concepts/bulk-processing) (such as smelting, smoking and washing).

By following these steps, you should have a solid foundation to build upon. To continue progressing, combine what you have learned here with the ingame [Ponder](./concepts/ponder) system, and start working towards [Brass](./materials/brass-ingot.md).

By this point you should also consider looking into Create's logistical features for moving items around and automating a few basic resources, as well as creating your first **Contraptions** &mdash; Tree farms and tunnel bores are fan favorites!
